Apostolopoulos N, Glaeser SP, Bagwe R, Janssen S, Mayer U, et al. (2021) **Description and comparison of the skin and ear canal microbiota of non-allergic and allergic German shepherd dogs using next generation sequencing**. PLOS ONE 16(5): e0250695. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0250695

## Abstract

Atopic dermatitis is one of the most common skin diseases in dogs. Pathogenesis is complex and incompletely understood. Skin colonizing bacteria likely play an important role in the severity of this disease. Studying the canine skin microbiota using traditional microbiological methods has many limitations which can be overcome by molecular procedures. The aim of this study was to describe the bacterial microbiota of the skin and ear canals of healthy non-allergic and allergic German shepherd dogs (GSDs) without acute flare or concurrent skin infection and to compare both. Bacterial 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequence data revealed no differences of bacterial community patterns between the different body sites (axilla, front dorsal interdigital skin, groin, and ear canals) in non-allergic dogs. The microbiota at the different body sites of non-allergic GSDs showed no significant differences. Only for the samples obtained from the axilla the bacterial microbiota of allergic dogs was characterized by a lower species richness compared to that of non-allergic dogs and the bacterial community composition of the skin and ear canals of allergic dogs showed body site specific differences compared to non-allergic dogs. Actinobacteria was the most abundant phylum identified from the non-allergic dogs and Proteobacteria from allergic dogs. Macrococcus spp. were more abundant on non-allergic skin while Sphingomonas spp. were more abundant on the allergic skin. Forward step redundancy analysis of metadata indicated that the household the dogs came from had the strongest impact on the composition of the skin microbiome followed by sex, host health status and body site.

